§ 903.09

MANUAL OF PATENT EXAMINING PROCEDURE

II. PATENT FILE WRAPPER

SPEs and examiners must use the Patent Transfer
Inquiry (PTI) system, which creates a record of the
transfer inquiry history of each application and
facilitates tracking of applications.

903.09 [Reserved]
903.09(a) [Reserved]

904 How to Search [R-10.2019]
The examiner, after having obtained a thorough
understanding of the invention disclosed and claimed
in the nonprovisional application, then searches the
prior art as disclosed in patents and other published
documents, i.e., nonpatent literature (NPL). Any
document used in the rejection of a claim is called
a reference. An inventor name search should be made
to identify other applications and/or patents which
may be applicable as references for double patenting
rejections. See MPEP § 804.
In all continuing applications, the parent applications
must be reviewed by the examiner for pertinent prior
art. The examiner must consider prior art which was
cited and considered in the parent application. See
MPEP §§ 609.02 and 2001.06(b). Where the cited
prior art of a parent application has been reviewed,
this fact should be made of record in accordance
with the procedure set forth at paragraph (J) of
MPEP § 719.05, subsection II.A. For national stage
applications filed under 35 U.S.C. 371, the examiner
will consider the documents cited in an international
search report when the Form PCT/DO/EO/903
indicates that both the international search report
and the copies of the documents are present in the
national stage application file. See MPEP § 609.03.
The first search should cover the invention as
described and claimed, including the inventive
concepts toward which the claims appear to be
directed. It should not be extended merely to add
immaterial variants. The examiner’s first Office
action on the merits of an application relies on
references identified in this initial search.

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

Following the first Office action, the examiner need
not ordinarily make a second search of the prior art,
unless necessitated by amendments to the claims by
the applicant in a reply to the first Office action,
except to check to determine whether any reference
which would appear to be substantially more
pertinent than the prior art cited in the first Office
action has become available subsequent to the initial
prior art search.
In the first action on the merits of an application, the
examiner must complete the Image File Wrapper
(IFW) search notes form to include the classification
locations of domestic and foreign patents, abstract
collections, and publications in which the search for
prior art was made. Other information collections
and sources in which the search for prior art was
made must also be identified by the examiner. The
examiner must also indicate the date(s) on which the
search was conducted. Note MPEP § 719.05.
In subsequent actions, where the search is brought
up-to-date and/or where a further search is made,
the examiner must indicate on the IFW search notes
form that the search has been updated and/or identify
the additional field(s) of search. See MPEP § 719.05.
Any search updates should include all of the relevant
or pertinent databases and the search queries and
classifications employed in the original search.

904.01 Analysis of Claims [R-08.2012]
The breadth of the claims in the application should
always be carefully noted; that is, the examiner
should be fully aware of what the claims do not call
for, as well as what they do require. During patent
examination and reexamination, the claims are given
the broadest reasonable interpretation consistent with
the specification. See In re Morris, 127 F.3d 1048,
44 USPQ2d 1023 (Fed. Cir. 1997) and In re NTP
Inc., 654 F3d 1279, 99 USPQ 1481 (Fed. Cir. 2011).
See MPEP § 2111 - § 2116.01 for case law pertinent
to claim analysis.

904.01(a) Variant Embodiments Within
Scope of Claim [R-08.2012]
Frequently, a claim includes within its breadth or
scope one or more variant embodiments that are not

900-40

PRIOR ART, CLASSIFICATION, AND SEARCH

disclosed in the application, but which would
anticipate the claimed invention if found in a
reference. The claim must be so analyzed and any
such variant encountered during the search should
be recognized.
For any claim capable of such treatment (e.g., a
machine or other apparatus), the subject matter as
defined by the claim may be sketched or diagrammed
in order to clearly delineate the limitations of the
claim. Two or more sketches, each of which is as
divergent from the disclosure as is permitted by the
claim, will assist the examiner in determining the
claim’s actual breadth or scope. However, an
applicant will not be required to submit such
sketches of claim structure. In re Application filed
November 16, 1945, 89 USPQ 280, 1951 C.D. 1,
646 O.G. 5 (Comm’r Pat. 1951).

904.01(b) Equivalents [R-08.2012]
All subject matter that is the equivalent of the subject
matter as defined in the claim, even though different
from the definition in the claim, must be considered
unless expressly excluded by the claimed subject
matter. See MPEP § 2181 - § 2184 for a discussion
of equivalents when a claim employs means or step
plus function terminology.

904.01(c) Analogous Arts [R-08.2012]
Not only must the art be searched within which the
invention claimed is classifiable, but also all
analogous arts must be searched regardless of where
the claimed invention is classified.
The determination of what arts are analogous to a
particular claimed invention is at times difficult. It
depends upon the necessary essential function or
utility of the subject matter covered by the claims,
and not upon what it is called by the applicant.
For example, for search purposes, a tea mixer and a
concrete mixer may both be regarded as relating to
the mixing art, this being the necessary function of
each. Similarly a brick-cutting machine and a biscuit
cutting machine may be considered as having the
same necessary function. See MPEP § 2141.01(a)
for a discussion of analogous and nonanalogous art

§ 904.02

in the context of establishing a prima facie case of
obviousness under 35 U.S.C. 103. See MPEP §
2131.05 for a discussion of analogous and
nonanalogous art in the context of 35 U.S.C. 102.

904.02 General Search Guidelines
[R-07.2015]
In the examination of an application for patent, an
examiner must conduct a thorough search of the
prior art. Planning a thorough search of the prior art
requires three distinct steps by the examiner: (A)
identifying the field of search; (B) selecting the
proper tool(s) to perform the search; and (C)
determining the appropriate search strategy for each
search tool selected. Each step is critical for a
complete and thorough search.
When determining the field of search, three reference
sources must be considered - domestic patents
(including patent application publications), foreign
patent documents, and nonpatent literature (NPL).
None of these sources can be eliminated from the
search unless the examiner has and can justify a
reasonable certainty that no references, more
pertinent than those already identified, are likely to
be found in the source(s) eliminated. The search
should cover the claimed subject matter and should
also cover the disclosed features which might
reasonably be expected to be claimed. The field of
search should be prioritized, starting with the area(s)
where the invention would most likely be found in
the prior art.
Having determined the field of search, the examiner
should then determine what search tools should be
employed in conducting the search. Examiners are
provided access to a wide variety of both manual
and automated search tools. Choice of search tools
is a key factor in ensuring that the most relevant
prior art is found during the search. The choice of
search tools to be used is based on the examiner’s
knowledge of the coverage, strengths and
weaknesses of the available search tools that are
appropriate for use in an examiner’s assigned art.
For example, a search tool may cover foreign patent
documents; but, if that coverage does not meet the
examiner’s current search needs, this should be taken
into consideration by the examiner who may choose

900-41

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

§ 904.02(a)

MANUAL OF PATENT EXAMINING PROCEDURE

to employ other search tools in order to remedy the
deficiency.
Search tool knowledge is particularly important for
examiners in arts (e.g., very active, high technology)
where patent documents may seriously lag behind
invention and, consequently, represent a reference
source of limited value. These examiners must take
special care to ensure that their searches include
consideration of NPL and employ the effective use
of tools specialized to cover NPL pertinent to their
search needs.
Search needs in some technologies, e.g., chemical
structures, DNA sequences, are very specialized and
can only be met through additional use of specific
search tools specially constructed and maintained to
respond to those needs. These tools cover all three
reference sources - domestic patents (including
patent application publications), foreign patent
documents, and NPL.
In recognition that there are many available NPL
search tools and their use is often complex,
examiners have been provided and are encouraged
to use the services of trained professional on-line
search personnel located in the Technology Centers’
EICs for NPL searching. See MPEP § 901.06(a) for
services available in STIC.
In crowded, highly developed arts where most
claimed inventions are directed to improvements,
patent documents, including patent application
publications, may serve as the primary reference
source. Search tool selection in such arts may focus
heavily on those providing patent document
coverage.
Automated search tools covering patent documents
usually provide both a classified and text search
capability. Text search can be powerful, especially
where the art includes well-established terminology
and the search need can be expressed with reasonable
accuracy in textual terms. However, it is rare that a
text search alone will constitute a thorough search
of patent documents. Some combination of text
search with other search criteria (e.g., classification,
chemical structure, or molecular sequence) would
be a normal expectation in most technologies.

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

Examiners will recognize that it is sometimes
difficult to express search needs accurately in textual
terms. This occurs often, though not exclusively, in
mechanical arts where, for example, spatial
relationships or shapes of mechanical components
constitute important aspects of the claimed invention.
In such situations, text searching can still be useful
by employing broader text terms, with or without
classification parameters. The traditional method of
browsing all patent documents in one or more
classifications will continue to be an important part
of the search strategy when it is difficult to express
search needs in textual terms.
Having determined what search tool(s) should be
used to conduct the search, the examiner should then
determine the appropriate search strategy for each
search tool selected. The appropriate search strategy
should be determined by the examiner on a
case-by-case basis along with consultation with other
examiners, supervisory patent examiners, and/or
trained professional on-line search personnel, where
appropriate.
In order for examiners to acquire specialized skills
needed to determine an appropriate field of search
in their specific arts, each Technology Center may
develop specific supplemental guidance and training
for its examiners. This training will augment general
training and information on search tools that is
normally provided through the Office of Patent
Training and Search and Information Resources
Administration.

904.02(a) Classified Search [R-08.2017]
A proper field of search normally includes the
classification locations in which the claimed subject
matter of an application would be properly classified
at the time of the application's classification or grant
of a patent. However, if the above proper
classification does not correspond to the subject
matter found in the claims (e.g., a situation where
the proper classification corresponds to a disclosed,
but unclaimed, embodiment), it is not necessary to
search areas in which it could reasonably have been
determined that there was a low probability of
finding the best reference(s).

900-42

PRIOR ART, CLASSIFICATION, AND SEARCH

In outlining a field of search, the examiner should
note
every
classification
location
(i.e.
group/subgroup of the Cooperative Patent
Classification or class/subclass of the U.S. Patent
Classification) under the utilized classification
system and other organized systems of literature that
may have material pertinent to the subject matter as
claimed, including those which have been assigned
by a foreign Office, another USPTO examiner, or
by the classification contractor. Every subclass,
digest, and cross-reference art collection pertinent
to each type of invention claimed should be included,
from the largest combination through the various
subcombinations to the most elementary part. The
field of search should extend to all probable areas
relevant to the claimed subject matter and should
cover the disclosed features which might reasonably
be expected to be claimed. The examiner should
consult with other examiners and/or supervisory

§ 904.02(b)

patent examiners, especially with regard to
applications covering subject matter unfamiliar to
the examiner.
The areas to be searched should be prioritized so
that the most likely areas of finding relevant prior
art are searched first. For documenting the field of
search see MPEP § 719.05. See MPEP § 1302.10
for search information printed on the face of a patent.

904.02(b) Search Tool Selection [R-07.2015]
Detailed guidance on the choice and use of specific
search tools can be established only within the
context of the special requirements of each
Technology Center (TC). However, a general
methodology following a “decision tree” process,
set forth below, for making broad decisions in search
tool selection is suggested.

900-43

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

§ 904.02(b)

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

MANUAL OF PATENT EXAMINING PROCEDURE

900-44

PRIOR ART, CLASSIFICATION, AND SEARCH

904.02(c) Internet Searching [R-10.2019]
The Internet is an Office-approved search tool that
may be considered when planning and conducting
a search for an application. The Internet provides
the Office the opportunity to enhance operations by
enabling patent examiners to efficiently locate and
retrieve additional sources of information relating
to a patent application.
The Office published a Patent Internet Usage Policy
to establish a policy for use of the Internet by the
patent examining corps and other organizations
within the USPTO. See Internet Usage Policy, 64
F.R. 33056 (June 21, 1999). Articles 9 and 10 of the
Patent Internet Usage Policy, which are pertinent to
Internet searching and documenting search strategies,
are reproduced below. Article 9 primarily addresses
using the Internet for unpublished application
searches. As mentioned therein, it is necessary that
Internet searches related to unpublished applications
MUST be limited to the general state of the art and
formulated in such a way that protects the
confidential proprietary intellectual property.
USPTO personnel may also use the Internet to
search, browse, or retrieve information relating to
the claimed invention(s) of a published application
or proceeding including an application published
pursuant to 35 U.S.C. 122(b), a reissue application,
or a reexamination proceeding. These applications
need not be kept in confidence; therefore, the
restriction on the search queries used when
performing an Internet search referenced in Article
9 below would not apply to these applications and
proceedings. Any search query may include
terminology related to the general state of the
relevant technology, disclosed features from
applicant’s disclosure and claim terminology. See
MPEP § 707.05(e) for information pertaining to the
citation of electronic documents, MPEP § 719.05,
subsection II for documenting an Internet search,
and MPEP § 502.03 for information pertaining to
communications via electronic mail.
The Internet is generally a public forum and most
communications made over the Internet are neither
confidential nor secure. All use of the Internet by
examiners must be conducted in a manner that
ensures compliance with confidentiality requirements

§ 904.02(c)

in the statutes, including 35 U.S.C. § 122, and
regulations. As part of an Internet search, examiners
may visit social media websites that provide for
public interactions, but are not authorized to
participate on these websites or otherwise solicit
assistance with patent examination even for
published applications. For example, an examiner
is not authorized to request users of a website to
provide additional information not found on the
website, elaborate further on information already
posted on the website, or post new information on
the website. Additionally, any Internet searching
that is conducted is to be limited to searching for the
information necessary for examination of the
application or proceeding, such as the state of the
art or the presence or absence of technical features
in the prior art.
INTERNET SEARCHING (ARTICLE 9)

The ultimate responsibility for formulating individual
search strategies lies with individual Patent
Examiners, Scientific and Technical Information
Center (STIC) staff, and anyone charged with
protecting proprietary application data. When the
Internet is used to search, browse, or retrieve
information relating to a patent application which
has not been published, other than a reissue
application or reexamination proceeding, Patent
Organization users MUST restrict search queries to
the general state of the art unless the Office has
established a secure link over the Internet with a
specific vendor to maintain the confidentiality of the
unpublished patent application. Non-secure Internet
search, browse, or retrieval activities that could
disclose proprietary information directed to a specific
application which has not been published, other than
a reissue application or reexamination proceeding,
are NOT permitted.
This policy also applies to use of the Internet as a
communications medium for connecting to
commercial database providers.
DOCUMENTING SEARCH STRATEGIES
(ARTICLE 10)

All Patent Organization users of the Internet for
patent application searches must document their
search strategies in accordance with established

900-45

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

§ 904.03

MANUAL OF PATENT EXAMINING PROCEDURE

practices and procedures as set forth in MPEP §
719.05 II.

904.03 Conducting the Search [R-07.2015]
It is a prerequisite to a speedy and just determination
of the issues involved in the examination of an
application that a careful and comprehensive search,
commensurate with the limitations appearing in the
most detailed claims in the case, be made in
preparing the first action on the merits so that the
second action on the merits can be made final or the
application allowed with no further searching other
than to update the original search. It is normally not
enough that references be selected to meet only the
terms of the claims alone, especially if only broad
claims are presented; but the search should, insofar
as possible, also cover all subject matter which the
examiner reasonably anticipates might be
incorporated into applicant’s amendment. Applicants
can facilitate a complete search by including, at the
time of filing, claims varying from the broadest to
which they believe they are entitled to the most
detailed that they would be willing to accept.
In doing a complete search, the examiner should find
and cite references that, while not needed for
rejecting the claims, would be useful for forestalling
the presentation of claims to other disclosed subject
matter regarded by applicant as his or her invention,
by showing that this other subject matter is old or
obvious.
In selecting the references to be used in rejecting the
claims, the examiner should carefully compare the
references with one another and with the applicant’s
disclosure to avoid an unnecessary number of
rejections over similar references. The examiner is
not called upon to cite all references that may be
available, but only the “best.” (See 37 CFR
1.104(c).) Multiplying references, any one of which
is as good as, but no better than, the others, adds to
the burden and cost of prosecution and should
therefore be avoided. The examiner must fully
consider all the prior art references cited in the
application, including those cited by the applicant
in a properly submitted Information Disclosure
Statement.

Rev. 10.2019, June 2020

The best reference should always be the one used in
rejecting the claims. Sometimes the best reference
will have a publication date less than a year prior to
the application filing date, hence it will be open to
being overcome under 37 CFR 1.130 or 1.131. In
such circumstances, if a second reference exists
which cannot be so overcome and which, though
inferior, is an adequate basis for rejection, the claims
should be additionally rejected thereon.
In all references considered, including NPL, foreign
patents, and domestic patents, the examiner should
study the specification or description sufficiently to
determine the full value of the reference disclosure
relative to the claimed or claimable subject matter.

905 Cooperative Patent Classification
[R-07.2015]
Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) is a bilateral
classification system jointly developed by the United
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and
the European Patent Office (EPO). CPC is jointly
managed and maintained by both offices and is
available for public search for classification.

905.01 Classification Scheme for CPC
[R-07.2015]
The CPC classification system arranges subject
matter into hierarchical arrays.
(A) The highest array or level is the Section.
(B) Each section is subdivided into Classes.
(C) Each class is subdivided into one or more
subclasses.
(D) Each subclass is broken down into Groups
(main groups and subgroups).
Each part of this hierarchical structure is identified
by classification symbols. Specifics about each
element of the classification symbol are described
below.
(A) Section Symbol – Each section is designated by
one of the capital letters A through H and has an
associated section title. There are nine sections, eight
of which correlate to the sections of the International
Patent Classification (IPC). The ninth section is used

900-46

